Support Development Seed’s Knight News Challenge Submission
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Data networks are local, new contribution tools for OpenStreetMap

Development Seed is applying for the Knight News Challenge with a [plan
to create new, user-friendly contribution tools for OpenStreetMap][].
We’d like to do for community open data what [TileMill][], a previous
[Knight news project][], has done for map design and publishing. Check
out [our brief submission][plan to create new, user-friendly
contribution tools for OpenStreetMap], and if you want to see these
tools funded, like it - every like counts in the voting process.

[OpenStreetMap][] proves that citizens make maps of their surroundings
with greater detail and focus than any company ever could. It’s the
dataset that we chose for [MapBox Streets][], and that humanitarian
groups like the [Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team][] base their important
work around.

OpenStreetMap has already moved incredibly far based on the work of
volunteers, large companies, and the open source community working
together. Its tools are made not only for simple road corrections, but
for the community itself to map cities from scratch, validate that data,
and distribute it on a massive scale.

However, there’s much further to go. Due to the recent news of large
switches like [foursquare][] and [Apple][], and coverage in [The New
York Times][] and [The Guardian][], [OpenStreetMap garners more
attention than ever][].

Our proposal to build new tools around OpenStreetMap targets this wave
of contributors as well as the long-term viability of the project: the
transition from [mapping cities from scratch][] to the maintenance,
validation, and improvement of local data, *by locals*.

We are proposing three new open source tools for OpenStreetMap - a
simplified editor, a geo aware task tracker, and a tiled geo data
delivery system. The three tools together are designed to lower the
threshold for first time contributors, to facilitate coordination within
the OpenStreetMap community, and to make OpenStreetMap data easier to
consume by providing a bandwidth optimized data delivery system. The
proposed plan with a budget of \$910,000 intends to concentrate serious
resources on these three key areas of the OpenStreetMap infrastructure
to provide polished and solid foundations for OpenStreetMap’s growth.

</section> <section id="simplified">

Simplified editor
-----------------

There is a clear need for a simplified web-based editor that focuses on
the most common OpenStreetMap tasks - an editor that guides
contributor’s first steps and helps advanced users be efficient,
precise, and focused. The editor should be simple to deploy and define a
plugin system so that it can be tuned for specialized use cases like
satellite tracing, street name entry, or validating large-scale changes.

In its generalized form this editor could be the default experience for
openstreetmap.org - if it earns the broad consent of the OpenStreetMap
community - but it could be equally useful as a platform for mapping
parties and large scale team mapping efforts like the ones led by the
Humanitarian OpenStreetMap team [in Indonesia][] right now.

We propose to use a similar architecture like TileMill, an application
that can be equally run offline on the desktop or online from a web
server.

This work is not without precedent. The [Potlatch project][], for
instance, has served as OpenStreetMap’s web editor for years and has
benefited from hundreds of hours of improvements by skilled
contributors. Our work aims to build tools within and with the existing
community of developers, and to push them to completion so there’s a
tangible improvement in the experience of a user initially going to
OpenStreetMap.org, clicking edit, and adding their own knowledge to the
map.